Promise me
you'll get him on that ship.
Where's my mom?
- Soren on Reach?
Who's gonna look after him?
Get up.
You said there were
other ways to live.
- That's right.
- Like what?
You know what I see?
I see some hard-ass Marines.
I do not see defeat
in this room,
and I do not see surrender.
No, sir!
The enemy is at our gates.
Their numbers are overwhelming.
We will not be able
to hold them back forever.
Run.
Just let Reach fall?
They knew this was gonna happen.
They saw it coming,
they did the math.
When did you leave ONI, Admiral?
You never left.
Command bugged out.
Took high-ranking personnel.
Valuable assets.
They took our suits.
Where's Danilo?
Riz!
He's not coming.
Any Marine who makes
this stand with us...
...will not survive the day.
- Got a light?
Jacob!
For every moment
that we hold the enemy at bay,
more innocent people
can escape on the transports.
And when they do,
they will go forth
and tell the story
that you write today.
You will be remembered...
No!
...as the brave women and men
who laid down their lives
so that our children
may live without fear
of this monster we call war.
John!
- John!
Chief!
Vannak!
Where's Vannak?
Reloading, right side!
I see 'em!
We can't stay here!
We get pinned down, we're done!
I know!
We gotta fall back!
To where?
- Go! Go!
- Moving!
- Come on!
- Get off me!
- I can fight!
- Moving!
It's not over.
Look at them all.
They're coming back.
Target in the open!
Is that all you got?
I thought I shouldn't have
said anything, but I said it.
- Now I regret saying it.
- Please stop talking.
Just like old times.
Shut up!
Oh, shit! Ah!
I did that. That was me.
I'm never gonna
hear the end of this.
Oh, you gotta be kidding me.
Halsey, get up!
John.
Can I get a little help
over here?
Get in! Let's go!
We got him!
They're coming! Hurry up!
Get in. Get us out of here.
Vannak.
No.
Riz!
Riz...
No!
Come on!
Riz!
Get us out of here!
Hang on!
Riz.
Check her airway.
It's me.
John! John!
- Riz...
- Look at me. Stay with me.
No, Riz...
Stay with me, John.
Chief.
Wake up.
I've got him. John. John?
- John, wake up.
Riz...
Save her.
You should have stayed with me.
Sever the connection.
We're losing him.
Please.
Please, will you help him?
That depends.
What are you prepared
to do for me?
You honor our people
with this great victory.
This was no victory.
We have only secured
one of the stolen Keystones.
And, once again,
the Blessed One has denied me.
There is a time and place for
every step in the Great Journey.
I grow weary of your gift.
This prophecy.
The Demon's death
is to be my redemption.
And you protect him--
I have no concern for the Demon.
I serve a higher purpose.
As do you.
Do not preach at me, human.
I remind you that
you live only by my grace.
If my life offends you,
I beg you to take it.
What is the value
of this human thing?
It is a vessel.
What does it contain?
Knowledge. Human knowledge.
Can it say where
they have taken the Keystone?
Perhaps. I will not know
until I look inside.
So look.
She shouldn't
have gone back for him.
- She knows better than that.
- You need to rest.
- Your wound is still healing.
- Is she gonna live?
She needs surgery.
I don't have the tools here.
She thought she had
something to prove.
And I used that to push her.
She went back because of me.
She went back because Spartans
don't leave Spartans behind.
There was no Spartan.
He was already gone.
She evaluated the conditions
and made a decision.
What decision is that?
Since when do we decide
anything? We don't choose.
You told us where to go
and what to think, who to kill,
and we did that every time,
without question.
You followed orders
like soldiers.
- Like machines.
- You're not a machine.
Oh?
What am I, then?
Don't say human,
because real people have lives.
They have families.
- Possibilities.
- You're upset.
- We all are.
Look at her.
- Tell me what you see.
- Let go.
Tell me what you see!
Is that a woman or a weapon?
Is there a person in there,
or is that just a piece
of equipment
you leave on the battlefield,
dump and forget?
They left us down there...
to die.
I know.
No evac, no armor.
- ONI knew we wouldn't make it.
- I know.
What about the other teams
on Reach?
Any contact?
Kai?
It was chaos.
The city fell.
Ships scattered.
There's no way of telling how
many escaped, let alone who--
- How long have I--?
- I had to induce a coma.
- How long?
- Two days.
- Two days?
We gotta get back.
- We gotta go--
- John, stop.
- The survivors--
- John, John...
People on Reach,
they need me.
No.
No, they don't.
You have a fever.
You're not yourself.
I told them what would happen.
- Come on.
- I told them.
I told Ackerson.
They already knew.
They knew.
And they did nothing.
I could have stopped it.
If I just... had my armor.
If she was with me.
Reach wasn't an accident.
It was a plan.
We need to be careful.
Invisible.
Do you understand?
So...
it's "we" now?
It always has been.
I know you hear.
I know you see.
Are you afraid?
I summon you.
I summon you in the name
of the Hierarchs,
voices of the gods.
Next time, you can just push
the little button there.
Fascinating.
This is a Covenant ship.
This is the command vessel
of the esteemed Zealot,
Var'Gatanai,
former Supreme Commander
of the First Fleet
of Solemn Accord.
The Arbiter.
What are you?
I am Cortana,
- the most advanced artificial--
- No.
What are you...
to him?
Master Chief?
I...
We work together.
What do you know of the demon?
He remembers you.
You keep his memories.
Show me.
Show me what he remembers
of the Ring.
It doesn't belong to you.
I don't belong to you.
If you cease to be useful
to me,
I will cease to be useful
to the Hierarchs.
You and I both know what happens
to an un-useful thing.
There are all kinds of prisons.
There you are.
You talk in your sleep.
He's back.
Hey, buddy.
You look like shit.
Where's Halsey?
Take it easy.
You've been out for three days.
I tried contacting the station.
Still nothing.
She's a fighter.
We're gonna get her help
when we get on the ground.
- Where?
- Aleria.
You heard of it?
Busted mining outpost.
We'll be orbital in a few hours.
Kessler's there.
Come on.
This way.
I stay with him at night.
Every night.
Where are you going?
I need to talk to Halsey.
You're not even
gonna look at him?
For what?
I've seen it before.
- He's your friend.
- This is a body.
My friend isn't here.
Set her on the gurney.
What's happened?
Have you got a sterile
field generator?
- We have an operating room.
- Have you got biofoam?
- Of course.
- Okay, set up a trauma station.
Prep 100 cc's of poly.
And if you're going to be
handling instruments,
then disinfect your hands.
- I'm the surgeon.
- Not today.
Nurse, 100 cc's of poly...
Nothing yet.
They're still working on her.
Riz is gonna be all right.
Kessler?
We're gonna ask around.
Soren?
There.
Laera, hold up.
Are you coming?
He's not gonna leave her.
Come on.
You're gonna freeze out here.
You the ones who landed
that piece of shit out there?
- Howdy, friend.
Yeah, howdy yourself.
I don't wanna even hear
about the northern range.
All them parcels is gone.
I still got some smaller pieces
near the old Volper foundry.
You might have heard
the ground's poisoned.
Well, it ain't.
It's supposed to be that color.
That's the original.
Hey.
You stretch it, you buy it.
It's on me.
Ooh!
I'll tell you what we can do.
Why don't you tell me
what you're looking for.
And I'll tell you
where you can find it.
Our son.
- What now?
Kessler.
He's ten years old.
Wears a helmet.
He was on a transport ship.
Would have landed here
a couple of days ago.
The, uh...
The Bodegraven.
Right. Right. Bodegraven.
And this kid...
you say it's yours?
I'm only asking, as most folks
come through are spoken for.
Especially little ones.
People pay good money.
Let's take a look.
Let's.
These last few days
been a goddamn circus.
You heard about Reach?
- Yes.
- I saw it coming a mile away.
That so?
UNSC never gave a shit
about the Covenant
coming for the Outer Colonies.
I shouldn't be surprised their
chickens came home to roost.
Bodegraven, right here.
This is him. Bodegraven.
Boy, ten years old.
- This is Kessler.
All right.
I'm gonna need everything
you got on this kid.
Here.
Thanks.
It's time.
For what?
No.
What do you mean, no?
We left him lying under a sheet.
We have to bury him.
- You don't bury a Spartan.
- Uh, okay.
So, what do you do?
- Sorry, I can't help you.
- Why not?
Are you scared?
The moment a person
becomes a Spartan,
their life in your world ends.
They live in mine.
There are no burials.
There's no funerals.
They've already said goodbye.
Well, that's stupid.
You're gonna wish
you had taken this chance.
You have no idea
what I'd give to...
Know what? Screw you.
I'll bury him myself.
- It makes no difference.
- It does to me.
You put them in the ground
and you leave them there.
Or they will follow you.
So let me get this straight.
You gotta clean it up,
but then the land is yours?
- Yeah, pretty much.
- Nice. What's the catch?
- No catch.
- No catch? Tell him.
Well, we can't leave.
Not ever?
Yeah, but who'd want to, right?
I mean, look at this place.
I'm happy for you.
It's beautiful, right?
Stop.
- What?
You're making friends
and enjoying the scenery.
We're looking for our son,
Soren.
I know.
We were on Reach.
All those people. They're gone.
A whole city.
A whole planet.
Does none of that touch you?
- Of course, it does.
- Then act like it.
You want me to be sad?
Scared?
Somebody's gotta
keep looking forward.
When things fall apart,
you're never there.
You ran from the Spartan
program.
You ran from the Rubble.
When Ruby Ann came for us,
it was all on me.
Whoa, whoa. Hold on.
You can't blame me for that.
Would they have come for us
if you'd been there?
And I do want you to be sad
and I do want you to be scared,
because that's where I am
and I want you with me.
♪ And your perfect lover ♪
♪ Just looks like
A perfect fool ♪
♪ So you go running off ♪
♪ In search
Of a perfect stranger ♪
♪ While the loneliness ♪
♪ Seems to spring
From your life ♪
This is exactly how you looked.
I was 14.
I woke up after
the augmentation and...
you looked at me.
Do you remember what you said?
Eyes.
Look up.
"One out of three."
Oh, so many that were better
than me didn't survive.
We get shot.
We get hurt.
We get up.
We do it all again.
That's all I know how to do.
I taught you everything.
Except how to quit.
I don't do it for you.
Riz...
I did everything I could.
But the damage is significant.
You won't be the soldier
you once were.
You were already diminished.
So...
you'll have to work harder.
Why'd you have to be so big?
Come on.
How's this?
Yeah, me too.
Damage accumulates.
She won't be the same
as she was, but time will help.
Riz will live
and she will fight again.
Well, none of us
are what we were.
And now we're expendable.
What happened on Reach
wasn't personal.
It wasn't even strategic.
It was political.
It was Parangosky.
This...
This was about control.
About who dictates
how this war is fought.
She won.
You can't grieve
an entire planet.
It's too big.
Our minds won't let it be real.
All those lives.
All those names.
It's too much.
I need you
to do something for me.
I never got to bury anyone.
Not my people.
Not my family.
Somehow, I need you
to be everyone that's gone.
Can you do that?
Parangosky's the one
who took Cortana out.
How could you possibly
have remembered that?
I don't know.
There's a space inside...
where there used to be a voice.
I'm feeling that somebody
knew me.
There was something that...
Cortana said...
right before she...
Go on.
What? What-- What did she say?
How did you choose...
W-W-W-What do you mean?
How did you choose me?
We created the genetic profile.
- We surveyed all the children--
- No.
Why me?
I don't understand.
- Yes, you do.
Tell the truth.
Just once.
We're not done here.
Stay back!
Come closer,
I will dig another hole!
- What are you doing?
- Hey!
This crazy's trying
to take him!
You can't put him in the ground.
I beg to differ!
Burn this body.
Let him find his way.
Whoa. Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey.
Hey!
- Get your hands off him!
Stop!
Chief?
This isn't death.
This is loss.
There's a difference.
Put him in the sky.
All right.
- Soren.
- Yeah.
- What do you want?
Good evening.
You're trespassing.
- Allow me to explain.
- We're here for our son.
Your what?
- Our son.
Kessler.
Nice boy.
- Like, yay, high--
- The kid is ours.
- The hell he is.
Now... let's calm down.
You can calm down
somewhere else.
This is a good home
and he likes it here,
and I'll be damned if I'm giving
him up to a couple of strangers.
We're not strangers.
We're his parents.
Even if that were true,
some parents you'd be.
He was half starved
when he got here.
Looked like he'd been slapped
around a little too.
- What did you say?
Yeah.
I guess we know
who's responsible for that now.
Fuck you! Kessler!
Kessler, come out here
right now!
Kessler!
They have him. They took him.
It's okay. It's gonna be okay.
- Calm down.
- What are we gonna do?
I'm here. I can handle this.
- It's a negotiation.
- It's our son.
Trust me.
I'll be right back.
Well, you all seem...
ready.
You never know when the world's
gonna fall apart.
Indeed.
This is some really good tea.
You said to give you
five minutes.
We already gave you two.
I grew up in a place
just like this.
What's that supposed to mean?
It means I know what it is
to scratch out a life.
The ground never gives you
what it promised.
There's never quite enough
to go around.
We get by.
I'm the kind of guy
that can get things.
The kind of things
that can compensate.
I know what an extra pair
of hands can mean.
Our boy isn't for sale.
I'm gonna be honest with you.
This is nothing
like where I grew up.
I was born in hell.
Raised in violence.
Being without a family,
without a home...
without food,
without protection.
Kessler!
Baby?
I realized I can survive
all that.
But the loneliness...
If anything was gonna kill me...
it would be that.
It's really me.
So now I'm a father.
And I live in fear...
It's okay.
...that my boy...
will never know that feeling.
That absence of love.
I am grateful that you're
the ones that took him in,
because I know in time,
he'd find love here.
But he's my son.
Where did you get this?
A boy gave it to me.
On the transport.
For protection.
He-- He saw that I was scared.
Where is he?
They took him away.
They're gonna let us
see Kessler.
Is that...?
No.
It's not Kessler.
Reach was more than a place.
It was a symbol.
It was a monument
to the human spirit...
and to those who sacrificed
everything to defend it.
Those like Admiral Jacob Keyes.
And this Spartan, Vannak Amadi.
He was born on Tribute.
I met him when he was six.
I could see he had honor.
He had a large family.
They would be proud
of his service.
His family buried him
when he was six.
They never knew him.
But I did.
His name was Vannak-134.
He was a Spartan.
He was our brother.
And the only family
that he ever knew.
This... This was not
an ordinary man.
Everything that he was,
everything that he gave...
it never dies.
Your fight is not done.
I will be your weapon now.
I will find the ones
who caused your death,
and I will end them.
You think
you can get to Parangosky?
To Ackerson?
You don't even know
where they are.
I'll find them.
You're gonna
get yourself killed.
I didn't choose you.
I found you.
Whatever built the Halo,
whatever left
those artifacts behind,
left something in you.
You can't run from this.
This has been calling to you
your whole life.
This is what you're meant to do.
The only thing I have to do
is find Parangosky, Ackerson.
John, you can take us
to the Halo.
The survival of our species
depends on what it can teach us.
If you go after ONI yourself,
you put all of that at risk.
They can't let you live.
I'm already dead.
Join us.
What?
Sorry, did...
Did you say something to me?
I speak for the planet.
Oh, you do?
I speak for all the planets.
Okay.
Where is...
I speak for Madrigal.
What did you say?
I cry out in pain.
My children are ash.
My skin is broken. My heart--
- Who the hell are you?
- Who are you?
No one.
You're Kwan Ha.
Last of the Has.
How...
How do you...
- Who are you?
- You turned your back on us.
- You forgot your name.
- Get away from me.
It's close now.
- The monster.
- Stay where you are!
Help me. Find me.
Deliver me. Save me.
Do not deny your purpose.
- Do not forsake your name.
- Leave me alone!
Protector.
What did you...?
What have you done?
Why are we at High Charity?
Our fleet has been recalled.
No. We have a mission,
to retrieve the--
We failed the mission.
Accept that.
Do you know
what they will do to us?
To me?
I can only hope
that they will accept
this token as an offering,
to mitigate my failure.
Do not do this.
The Hierarchs command it.
The Hierarchs are liars.
Blaspheme again, and I will
rip the breath from your body.
The Prophets are false.
They have no intention
of beginning the Great Journey.
It is not in their power
to do so.
They are not Chosen.
And they know it.
It is our destiny I have seen.
You will be the one to lead us
to the Sacred Ring.
Your flattery is as cruel
as it is empty.
These Prophets
that would shame you
do so because they fear you.
They see your greatness
and the purity of your faith.
And it makes them
choke on their hypocrisy.
How are you doing this?
This is not my doing.
This is yours.
This is your destiny.
You need only take it.
What must I do?
Believe.
You must believe. In me.
I am the Blessed One.
They will send the entire fleet
to hunt us down.
And they will fail.
It is written.
Can I help you?
Gloves?
Right over there.
Oh, it's you.
I didn't recognize you
with your...
Do you have any barbed wire?
Where's that, uh,
fella that was with you?
He wanted to come.
But I didn't think
that would be prudent.
Prudent?
He can be a bit emotional.
Whereas I see this kind of
situation a bit more clearly.
- I don't think I understand.
- Of course you do.
You had a mother, didn't you?
- Yeah.
No one should come
between a mother and her child.
It's a powerful bond.
Instinctive.
You know, we got a lot of kids
coming through here--
The other day...
I caught a scent in the air,
that took me back
to the first time
I cut Kessler's hair.
He was so little.
Look, lady, I--
I'm just a businessman.
He was squirming.
I was nervous
that I would hurt him.
And that's when I knew...
that if anyone
ever caused him pain,
there's no telling
what I would do.
There would be no limit.
You know what I mean?
Did he talk?
Yes.
Did he say who took Kessler?
The UNSC.
We're wheels up in ten.
Riz...
- get your stuff--
I'm not gonna make it.
What are you talking about?
- You're gonna be fine.
- I'm gonna stay here.
Get your head in the game.
My fight's over, Chief.
It's over when Vannak
says it's over.
- When Kai says--
- Chief--
It's over when we win!
On your feet.
I gave you an order, Spartan.
Stand up.
We lost Reach.
We lost Vannak...
- Kai...
- I know.
Then what are you
gonna do about it?
I'm going to live.
You don't get to say no
to this.
We owe them, Riz.
We lost them.
- I lost them.
- It's just pain.
All you can do is carry it.
But it's heavy.
And the more you deny it,
the more you run from it,
the heavier it gets.
If you don't make peace with it,
it will crush you.
I won't let it crush me.
You're all I have left.
I know.
She's not coming.
So...
you're no one now.
Attention on deck!